# Printing

When writing a program, it is quite common to print some data to the console, either for the normal process of the program or for debugging purpose. In this chapter, we describe the options you have to print simple and complex data types.

## Printing standard data types

Cairo provides two macros to print standard data types:

- `println!` which prints on a new line,
- `print!` with inline printing.

Both take a `ByteArray` string as first parameter (See [Data Types](ch02-02-data-types.md#byte-array-strings)) which can be a simple string to print a message or a string with placeholders to format the way values are printed.

There are two ways to use these placeholders and both can be mixed:

- empty curly brackets `{}` are replaced by values given as parameters to the `print!` macro, in the same order.
- curly brackets with variable names are directly replaced by the variable value.

Here are some examples:

```rust
{{#include ../listings/ch11-advanced-features/no_listing_08_print_macro/src/lib.cairo}}
```

## Formatting

Cairo also provides a useful macro to handle strings formatting: `format!`. This macro works like `println!`, but instead of printing the output to the screen, it returns a `ByteArray` with the contents. In the following example, we perform string concatenation using either the `+` operator or the
`format!` macro. The version of the code using `format!` is much easier to read, and the code generated by the `format!` macro uses snapshots so that this call doesn’t take ownership of any of its parameters.

```rust
{{#include ../listings/ch11-advanced-features/no_listing_06_format_macro/src/lib.cairo}}
```

## Printing custom data types

If you try to print a custom data type with `print!` and `println!` macros, you'll get an error telling you that the `Display` trait is not implemented for your custom type.

Here is the `Display` trait to implement:

```rust
trait Display<T> {
    fn fmt(self: @T, ref f: Formatter) -> Result<(), Error>;
}
```

The second parameter `f` is a `Formatter`, which is just a struct containing a `ByteArray`, representing the pending result of formatting.

Knowing this, here is an example of how to implement the `Display` trait for a custom `Point` struct:

```rust
{{#include ../listings/ch11-advanced-features/no_listing_09_display_trait_with_format/src/lib.cairo}}
```

Cairo also provides the `write!` and `writeln!` macros to write formatted strings in a formatter.
Here are some examples:

```rust
{{#include ../listings/ch11-advanced-features/no_listing_07_write_macro/src/lib.cairo}}
```

So, you can also implement the `Display` trait for the `Point` struct as follows:

```rust
{{#include ../listings/ch11-advanced-features/no_listing_10_display_trait_with_write/src/lib.cairo}}
```

## Print debug traces

To print some debug data, Cairo provides the derivable trait `Debug`. Look at the [Derivable Traits](appendix-03-derivable-traits.md) appendix, for more details.
