# Components under the hood

Components provide powerful modularity to Starknet contracts. But how does this
magic actually happen behind the scenes?

This chapter will dive deep into the compiler internals to explain the
mechanisms that enable component composability.

## A Primer on Embeddable Impls

Before digging into components, we need to understand _embeddable impls_.

An impl of a Starknet interface trait (marked with `#[starknet::interface]`) can
be made embeddable. Embeddable impls can be injected into any contract, adding
new entry points and modifying the ABI of the contract.

Let's look at an example to see this in action:

```rust
{{#include ../listings/ch99-starknet-smart-contracts/components/no_listing_01_embeddable/src/lib.cairo}}
```

By embedding `SimpleImpl`, we externally expose `ret4` in the contract's ABI.

Now that we’re more familiar with the embedding mechanism, we can now see how
components build on this.

## Inside Components: Generic Impls

Recall the impl block syntax used in components:

```rust
{{#include ../listings/ch99-starknet-smart-contracts/components/listing_01_ownable/src/component.cairo:impl_signature}}
```

The key points:

- `OwnableImpl` requires the implementation of the
  `HasComponent<TContractState>` trait by the underlying contract, which is
  automatically generated with the `component!()` macro when using a component
  inside a contract.

  The compiler will generate an impl that wraps any function in `OwnableImpl`,
  replacing the `self: ComponentState<TContractState>` argument with `self:
TContractState`, where access to the component state is made via the
  `get_component` function in the `HasComponent<TContractState>` trait.

  For each component, the compiler generates a `HasComponent` trait. This trait
  defines the interface to bridge between the actual `TContractState` of a
  generic contract, and `ComponentState<TContractState>`.

  ```rust
  // generated per component
  trait HasComponent<TContractState> {
      fn get_component(self: @TContractState) -> @ComponentState<TContractState>;
      fn get_component_mut(ref self: TContractState) -> ComponentState<TContractState>;
      fn get_contract(self: @ComponentState<TContractState>) -> @TContractState;
      fn get_contract_mut(ref self: ComponentState<TContractState>) -> TContractState;
      fn emit<S, impl IntoImp: traits::Into<S, Event>>(ref self: ComponentState<TContractState>, event: S);
  }
  ```

  In our context `ComponentState<TContractState>` is a type specific to the
  ownable component, i.e. it has members based on the storage variables defined
  in `ownable_component::Storage`. Moving from the generic `TContractState` to
  `ComponentState<TContractState>` will allow us to embed `Ownable` in any
  contract that wants to use it. The opposite direction
  (`ComponentState<TContractState>` to `ContractState`) is useful for
  dependencies (see the `Upgradeable` component depending on an `IOwnable`
  implementation example in the [Components dependencies ](./ch99-01-05-02-component-dependencies.md) section.

  To put it briefly, one should think of an implementation of the above
  `HasComponent<T>` as saying: **“Contract whose state T has the upgradeable
  component”.**

- `Ownable` is annotated with the `embeddable_as(<name>)` attribute:

  `embeddable_as` is similar to `embeddable`; it only applies to `impls` of
  `starknet::interface` traits and allows embedding this impl in a contract
  module. That said, `embeddable_as(<name>)` has another role in the context of
  components. Eventually, when embedding `OwnableImpl` in some contract, we
  expect to get an impl with the following functions:

  ```rust
  {{#include ../listings/ch99-starknet-smart-contracts/components/listing_01_ownable/src/component.cairo:trait_def}}
  ```

  Note that while starting with a function receiving the generic type
  `ComponentState<TContractState>`, we want to end up with a function receiving
  `ContractState`. This is where `embeddable_as(<name>)` comes in. To see the
  full picture, we need to see what is the impl generated by the compiler due to
  the `embeddable_as(Ownable)` annotation:

  ```rust
  #[starknet::embeddable]
  impl Ownable<
            TContractState, +HasComponent<TContractState>
  , impl TContractStateDrop: Drop<TContractState>
  > of super::IOwnable<TContractState> {

    fn owner(self: @TContractState) -> ContractAddress {
        let component = HasComponent::get_component(self);
        OwnableImpl::owner(component, )
    }

    fn transfer_ownership(ref self: TContractState, new_owner: ContractAddress
  ) {
        let mut component = HasComponent::get_component_mut(ref self);
        OwnableImpl::transfer_ownership(ref component, new_owner, )
    }

    fn renounce_ownership(ref self: TContractState) {
        let mut component = HasComponent::get_component_mut(ref self);
        OwnableImpl::renounce_ownership(ref component, )
    }
  }
  ```

  Note that thanks to having an impl of `HasComponent<TContractState>`, the
  compiler was able to wrap our functions in a new impl that doesn’t directly
  know about the `ComponentState` type. `Ownable`, whose name we chose when
  writing `embeddable_as(Ownable)`, is the impl that we will embed in a contract
  that wants ownership.

## Contract Integration

We've seen how generic impls enable component reusability. Next let's see how a
contract integrates a component.

The contract uses an **impl alias** to instantiate the component's generic impl
with the concrete `ContractState` of the contract.

```rust
{{#include ../listings/ch99-starknet-smart-contracts/components/listing_01_ownable/src/contract.cairo:embedded_impl}}
```

The above lines use the Cairo impl embedding mechanism alongside the impl alias
syntax. We’re instantiating the generic `OwnableImpl<TContractState>` with the
concrete type `ContractState`. Recall that `OwnableImpl<TContractState>` has the
`HasComponent<TContractState>` generic impl parameter. An implementation of this
trait is generated by the `component!` macro.

Note that only the using contract
could have implemented this trait since only it knows about both the contract
state and the component state.

This glues everything together to inject the component logic into the contract.

## Key Takeaways

- Embeddable impls allow injecting components logic into contracts by adding
  entry points and modifying the contract ABI.
- The compiler automatically generates a `HasComponent` trait implementation
  when a component is used in a contract. This creates a bridge between the
  contract's state and the component's state, enabling interaction between the
  two.
- Components encapsulate reusable logic in a generic, contract-agnostic way.
  Contracts integrate components through impl aliases and access them via the
  generated `HasComponent` trait.
- Components build on embeddable impls by defining generic component logic that
  can be integrated into any contract wanting to use that component. Impl
  aliases instantiate these generic impls with the contract's concrete storage
  types.
