# ECDSA Builtin

The Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm (ECDSA) uses elliptic curve cryptography (ECC) to generate keys that are used by the Digital Signature Algorithm (DSA).
ECDSA enables users to generate a digital signature for a given message, which can be verified by other users who possess the signer's public key. There is a non-complex sign-in and verification procedure.

This built-in carries out pre-defined functions like signing data, key generation, verifying signatures and so on.
It is a well tested algorithm with impenetrable security and it is very convenient to use because it saves developers the time they would’ve spent trying to implement complex ECDSA algorithms by themselves.

### Cells involved in the ECDSA Builtin.
Some of the key components, otherwise classified as cells associated with the ECDSA are, but are not limited to bits like:
* The Elliptic curves: 
This is an approach to public-key cryptography that leverages the curve to provide encryption to those keys. It is typically represented by the formula y2=x3+ax+b, where a and b are constants.
* Private Key (Privkey) and Public Key (Pubkey):
While the privkey is known only to the owner, it is also used to develop a pubkey which is made available for anyone to use.
* Hashing Function.
* Random number generation.
* Signature generation and verification.

*Below, there is an explanation of how all this cells unify in the ECDSA Builtin*

### How this cells work together in the ECDSA Builtin.

A private key is created using a random number generator and from that privkey, a public key, which is then shared, is created.

A signature is furthermore created by calculating the message digest of the message using a hash function. 

A random integer is obtained and used to calculate the ECSDA signature on the elliptic curve to produce the r and s values which is then outputted along with the message.

To verify the validity of the signature, the public key is used by the receiver to check if "r and s" satisfy the verification equation. 
This will confirm that the signature was obtained using the private key and this further proves that the signature was not tampered with.